Strip down: EOA transactions, batch counter & validation/execution, 2D nonce manager (#4)
eth-infinitism/RIPs: RIPS/rip-7560.md

0x04 || 0x00 || rlp([
  chainId, sender, nonce, builderFee,

>   callData,

Reviewer: I try to order the fields in some logical way.
the code flow is  create -> validate -> paymaster

(gas limits below are ordered that way)

Author: @drortirosh I changed the order of parameters both here and in the `TransactionType4` solidity struct. Please have a look and tell me if this one makes sense to you. Thanks!

This value is denominated in wei and is passed from the `sender`, or the `paymaster` if it is specified,

> to the `coinbase` of the current block as part of the gas pre-charge.

Reviewer: this is the first time you mention `coinbase` - it should be applied for general gas payments, above.

L128, above: `callDataCost` can't be compared to `validationGasLimit` (different units)

Author: > this is the first time you mention `coinbase` - it should be applied for general gas payments, above.
> 
> L128, above: `callDataCost` can't be compared to `validationGasLimit` (different units)

It seems to be obvious (and defined in EIP-1559) what the meanings of `maxFeePerGas` and `maxPriorityFeePerGas` parameters are. This document does not change that so it doesn't have to redefine these parameters. I will just add a mention that these values are unchanged, I think.

 The `callDataCost` is measured in "gas units" here. Will rename to `callDataGasUsed` to avoid this confusion.

   * `paymaster` post-transaction frame (optional)

All execution frames in the "Validation Phase" must be completed successfully without reverting, and the return value

> for `sender` and `paymaster` validation frames must include `MAGIC_VALUE_SENDER` and `MAGIC_VALUE_PAYMASTER` accordingly

Reviewer: the magic return value is not a MUST (as it is part of execution, which we don't control)
Those frames are implicitly reverted if they return anything else.

Author: > the magic return value is not a MUST (as it is part of execution, which we don't control) Those frames are implicitly reverted if they return anything else.

We control the block validity. If they return anything else the block is invalid. So I think "MUST" should stay.

| `ORIGIN`    | `tx.origin`         | The transaction `sender` address                                              |
| `CALLDATA*` | `msg.data`          | The transaction data is set to inputs of the corresponding frame              |

#### Sender deployment frame

> The `deployer` address is invoked with the `deployerData[20:]` as call data input.

Reviewer: extract "rationale for separate AA_SENDER_CREATOR" from this, and move into the "rationale" section.

Reviewer: in TransactionType4 type below, missing postOpGasLimit (which we encode into paymasterAndData, along with paymasterGasLimit)

Author: Fixed and fixed.

struct TransactionType4 {
    address sender;
    address paymaster;
    address deployer;
    uint256 nonce;
    uint256 validationGasLimit;
    uint256 paymasterValidationGasLimit;
    uint256 paymasterPostOpGasLimit;
    uint256 callGasLimit;
    uint256 maxFeePerGas;

>     uint256 maxPriorityFeePerGas;

Reviewer: placing all "bytes" at the end is good, since it allows some optimization when sending the tx.
but still, the ordering is strange.  why paymaster first?

> and the sending node will be blocked as a spammer.

Reviewer: mixing here propagation and execution. should be separated.

Author: Removed the paragraph.

(`AA_TX_TYPE transaction hash + 1`).

All block-related RPC methods, like `eth_getBlockByHash` and `eth_getBlockByNumber`, must include these virtual
transactions as part of the `transactions` field and include validation in the block transaction count.

All transaction-related RPC methods, like `eth_getTransactionByHash` and `eth_getTransactionReceipt`, must
accept the virtual transaction hash as input and return the details calculated as if the validation was a
separate transaction.

There is a number of behaviours that define transaction-wide effects in Ethereum.
This list includes, but is not limited to:

* Tracking `accessed_addresses`
* [EIP-1283](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1283) Gas metering for SSTORE
* [EIP-1153](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-1153) Transient storage opcodes

Any such behaviour has separate effects in the "Validation Virtual Transaction" and "Execution Transaction".

Gas refunds are issued at the end of the entire transaction only.

### Transaction validity time range parameters

The `Paymaster validation frame` and the `Sender validation frame` each return values `validUntil` and `validAfter`.

> If the transaction is initiated by an EOA, these fields may be encoded into unused bits of the `nonce`.

Reviewer: remove this nonce field usage from the sample code too.

Author: Fixed.

We argue that the most straightforward implementation is to rely on Solidity 4-byte method selectors as it is an
established de-facto standard.

> ### Calling the `deployer` from the `AA_SENDER_CREATOR` addres

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Calling the `deployer` from the `AA_SENDER_CREATOR` address
```

[EIP-3607](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3607) introduces a ban on transactions from senders with deployed code.
This limitation does not apply to AA_TX_TYPE transactions.

### Deterministic addresses and Smart Contract Account `nonce` value

Before RIP-7560, for accounts with associated code (smart contracts), the account nonce is only used and incremented
when the account executes the `CREATE` (`0xf0`) opcode.

With RIP-7560, the `sender` account's `nonce` will be incremented before a transaction execution starts.

> Developer tooling that rely on counterfactual addresses should take that into account or risk missing the right address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developer tooling that rely on counterfactual addresses should take that into account.
```

The following is a non-exhaustive list of known security considerations regarding Native Account Abstraction.

### DoS attacks on block builders

> The amount of computation and available memory that is necessary to produce

Reviewer: this section is repeated on L515

Author: Fixed.

to rely on the `validUntil` time range parameter to guarantee a transaction that has not been included in the intended time
will not become valid again unexpectedly for the user who had sent it.

### Denial of Service attacks on the block builder

It is important to consider the ability of the block builder to fill the block with transactions in the allotted time.

In terms of block validity, all validation and execution frames may read and write any state when included in the block.
This means that transactions are technically able to invalidate each other.

Block builders may face a risk of having multiple eligible
transactions being invalidated by a single transaction once they include it in a block, causing the Denial of Service.
Sequencer-like block builders do not have such a risk as long as they process incoming transactions
in the order they are received.

As part of the mitigation, the AA transactions SHOULD be bound by storage access rules to avoid
DoS on block builders.

> These rules are defined in [ERC-7562](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eips/eip-7562).

Reviewer: remove full paths: just `(./eip-7562)`, regardless if it is eip/erc/ 
The EIP parser should fix it.

Author: The RIP repo is not set up with these tools yet, so it will just be a broken link. I think we will be asked to update the document once the parsers and linters are operational.

[EIP-3607](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-3607) introduces a ban on transactions from senders with deployed code.
This limitation does not apply to AA_TX_TYPE transactions.

### Deterministic addresses and Smart Contract Account `nonce` value

Before RIP-7560, for accounts with associated code (smart contracts), the account nonce is only used and incremented
when the account executes the `CREATE` (`0xf0`) opcode.

With RIP-7560, the `sender` account's `nonce` will be incremented before a transaction execution starts.

> Developer tooling that rely on counterfactual addresses should take that into account or risk missing the right address.

Reviewer 2: That's only an issue with CREATE though, not CREATE2, right?

Author: Right. Added an explanation.

The following is a non-exhaustive list of known security considerations regarding Native Account Abstraction.

### Attacks on validation-execution separation

The state that exists at the end of the validation frame may be observed or modified by unrelated contracts before
the execution frame begins.
`Sender` contracts must take great care in making sure their code does not make any false assumptions.

> 

Reviewer 2: Since we remove validation-execution separation from this RIP, shouldn't we mention the DoS risk on block builders?  Without this separation, this RIP is only safe for chains that don't have a decentralized mempool (such as the single-sequencers used by most rollups), since they look at one transaction at a time and always add it to the current position in the block.  For chains that use a decentralized mempool, cross-transaction invalidations require that separation.

Author: Added "Denial of Service attacks on the block builder" security consideration paragraph. I tried to keep it generic and not use any rollup-specific jargon. Please tell me how does it look.

to rely on the `validUntil` time range parameter to guarantee a transaction that has not been included in the intended time
will not become valid again unexpectedly for the user who had sent it.

### Denial of Service attacks on the block builder

It is important to consider the ability of the block builder to fill the block with transactions in the allotted time.

In terms of block validity, all validation and execution frames may read and write any state when included in the block.
This means that transactions are technically able to invalidate each other.

Block builders that rely on a decentralized and permissionless transaction mempool face a risk of having their entire
transaction mempool being invalidated by a single transaction they pick from it, causing the Denial of Service.

> Sequencer-like block builders do not have such a risk as long as they process incoming transactions one at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sequencer-like block builders do not have such a risk as long as they process incoming transactions in the order they are received.
```
